---
title: "Finding Typing Compiler Bugs"
date: 2023-05-03
tags: [Compilers, Programming Languages, Types, Bugfinding]
categories: [PLDI, "PLDI '22"]
author: Akshay
---

**Authors:**

Stefanos Chaliasos, _Imperial College London_; Thodoris Sotiropoulos, _Athens
University of Economics and Business_; Diomidis Spinellis, _Athens University
of Economics and Business_ and _Delft University of Technology the
Netherlands_; Arthur Gervais, Benjamin Livshits, _Imperial College London_;
Dimitris Mitropoulos, _University of Athens_

**Abstract:**

We propose a testing framework for validating static typing procedures in
compilers. Our core component is a program generator suitably crafted for
producing programs that are likely to trigger typing compiler bugs. One of our
main contributions is that our program generator gives rise to
transformation-based compiler testing for finding typing bugs. We present two
novel approaches (type erasure mutation and type overwriting mutation) that
apply targeted transformations to an input program to reveal type inference and
soundness compiler bugs respectively. Both approaches are guided by an
intra-procedural type inference analysis used to capture type information flow.

We implement our techniques as a tool, which we call Hephaestus. The
extensibility of Hephaestus enables us to test the compilers of three popular
JVM languages: Java, Kotlin, and Groovy. Within nine months of testing, we have
found 156 bugs (137 confirmed and 85 fixed) with diverse manifestations and
root causes in all the examined compilers. Most of the discovered bugs lie in
the heart of many critical components related to static typing, such as type
inference.

**Video:**
{{< youtube YG207DwbBBU >}}

**Links:**
- [Paper](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3519939.3523427)

From [PLDI '22](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3519939.3523427).
