---
title: "BuildIt: A Type-Based Multi-stage Programming Framework for Code Generation in C++"
date: 2023-05-10
tags: [Programming Languages, Types, DSLs]
categories: [CGO, "CGO '21"]
author: Rupanshu
---

**Authors:**

Ajay Brahmakshatriya and Saman Amarasinghe, _CSAIL, MIT_

**Abstract:**

The simplest implementation of a domain-specific language is to embed it in an
existing language using operator overloading. This way, the DSL can inherit
parsing, syntax and type checking, error handling, and the toolchain of
debuggers and IDEs from the host language. A natural host language choice for
most high-performance DSLs is the de-facto high-performance language, C++.
However, DSL designers quickly run into the problem of not being able to
extract control flows due to a lack of introspection in C++ and have to resort
to special functions with lambdas to represent loops and conditionals. This
approach introduces unnecessary syntax and does not capture the side effects of
updates inside the lambdas in a safe way. We present BuildIt, a type-based
multi-stage execution framework that solves this problem by extracting all
control flow operators like if-then-else conditionals and for and while loops
using a pure library approach. BuildIt achieves this by repeated execution of
the program to explore all control flow paths and construct the AST piece by
piece. We show that BuildIt can do this without exponential blow-up in terms of
output size and execution time. We apply BuildIt's staging capabilities to the
state-of-the-art tensor compiler TACO to generate low-level IR for custom-level
formats. Thus, BuildIt offers a way to get both generalization and
programmability for the user while generating specialized and efficient code.
We also demonstrate that BuildIt can generate rich control-flow from relatively
simple code by using it to stage an interpreter for an esoteric language.
BuildIt changes the way we think about multi-staging as a problem by reducing
the PL complexity of a supposedly harder problem requiring features like
introspection or specialized compiler support to a set of common features found
in most languages.

**Video:**
{{< youtube JHSCu4tzcPo >}}

**Links:**
- [Paper (via IEEE)](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9370333)
- [Project](https://buildit.so/)

From [CGO '21](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9370333).
